[Docs] OSSM with ZTWIM federation (#828)
openshift-service-mesh/sail-operator: docs/ossm/integrations/spire/spire.adoc

If you receive an HTTP 200 code, it means your traffic
is being securely routed from the Istio Gateway pod
to the httpbin service using SPIFFE mTLS connection.

> Multi-Primary Istio on different networks with SPIRE federation

Reviewer: This should be a subtitle?

Reviewer: Or is duplicated with the subtittle from bellow

Author: removed duplication

[[federation]]
=== Multi-Primary on different networks with Spire Federation
In this tutorial we'll be deploying Istio multi-primary on different networks with Spire Federation.
Follow this guide to install the Istio control plane on both `cluster-a` and `cluster-b`, making each a primary cluster.
Cluster `cluster-a` is on the `network-a` network, while `cluster-b` is on the `network-b` network.
Cluster `cluster-a` trust domain is set to `cluster-a` while trust domain of cluster `cluster-b` is set to `cluster-b`.
This means there is no direct connectivity between pods across cluster
boundaries and each cluster has it own trust
domain. No pre-configured trust is configured between the two clusters.

_⚠️ Ensure your Istio version is at least 1.29.2 before attempting
a multicluster federated configuration._

> The trust domain name must be set to the same value for both Spier and Istio installations within the same cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The trust domain name must be set to the same value for both Spire and Istio installations within the same cluster.
```

> In our example, we are assume `Cluster A` will have Spire and Istio trust domain name set to `cluster-a`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In our example, let's assum `Cluster A` will have Spire and Istio trust domain name set to `cluster-a`
```

Sound more natural

> while `Cluster B` trust domain name will be set to `cluster-b`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
while `Cluster B` trust domain name will be set to `cluster-b`. 

To run this example, you will need to set all this env var to make easier to go over each step
```

kubectl patch clusterspiffeid zero-trust-workload-identity-manager-spire-default \
  --kubeconfig="${CLUSTER_A_KUBECONFIG}" \
  --type=merge \
  -p "{\"spec\":{\"federatesWith\":[\"${CLUSTER_B}\"],\"autoPopulateDNSNames\":true}}"

# Patch ClusterSPIFFEID on CLUSTER B to federate with CLUSTER A
kubectl patch clusterspiffeid zero-trust-workload-identity-manager-spire-default \
  --kubeconfig="${CLUSTER_B_KUBECONFIG}" \
  --type=merge \
  -p "{\"spec\":{\"federatesWith\":[\"${CLUSTER_A}\"],\"autoPopulateDNSNames\":true}}"
----

==== [[fed-install-ossm-operator]]Install OSSM Operator
Follow this <<sail-operator,guide>> and install Sail Operator only without any operands

==== [[fed-install-ossm-cni]]Install Istio CNI
Follow this <<create-istio-cni,guide>> and install Istio CNI

Discover bundle endpoint url for both clusters
[source,bash]
----
export CLUSTER_A_BUNDLE_ENDPOINT_URL=$(oc get ClusterFederatedTrustDomain cluster-a --kubeconfig=${CLUSTER_B_KUBECONFIG} -o jsonpath={.spec.bundleEndpointURL})
export CLUSTER_B_BUNDLE_ENDPOINT_URL=$(oc get ClusterFederatedTrustDomain cluster-b --kubeconfig=${CLUSTER_A_KUBECONFIG} -o jsonpath={.spec.bundleEndpointURL})
----

> Create `Istio` CR In `cluster-a`

Reviewer: To help to later have a good OSSM Red Hat documentation, do you think it will be better to add a section under the Istio CR creation that explains which setting are done? I mean something like:

* Setting sidecarInjectorWebhook.xxxxx to xxxx because we need to set this and this in the injected proxy at the workloads

wdyt? At the end we need to think that this documentation is for user from OSSM

Author: I'll add comments near each each parameter. This will help to organize the official docs later.

If you receive an HTTP 200 code, it means your traffic
is being securely routed from the Istio Gateway pod
to the httpbin service using SPIFFE mTLS connection.

Multi-Primary Istio on different networks with SPIRE federation

[[federation]]
=== Multi-Primary on different networks with Spire Federation
In this tutorial we'll be deploying Istio multi-primary on different networks with Spire Federation.
Follow this guide to install the Istio control plane on both `cluster-a` and `cluster-b`, making each a primary cluster.
Cluster `cluster-a` is on the `network-a` network, while `cluster-b` is on the `network-b` network.
Cluster `cluster-a` trust domain is set to `cluster-a` while trust domain of cluster `cluster-b` is set to `cluster-b`.
This means there is no direct connectivity between pods across cluster
boundaries and each cluster has it own trust
domain. No pre-configured trust is configured between the two clusters.

==== [[prerequisites]] Prerequisites

Create two OpenShift clusters.
Create a directory `ossm-ztwim-federation`, cd into directory `ossm-ztwim-federation`.
To easily access both clusters,
create two files `cluster-a.kubeconfig`
and `cluster-b.kubeconfig`.

> Store the kubeconfig content accordingly

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Create two OpenShift clusters.
* Create a directory `ossm-ztwim-federation`, cd into the directory `ossm-ztwim-federation`.
To easily access both clusters, create two files `cluster-a.kubeconfig` and `cluster-b.kubeconfig`.
* Store the kubeconfig content accordingly
```

[source,bash]
----
mkdir ossm-ztwim-federation \
  && cd ossm-ztwim-federation
# create cluster-a.kubeconfig file
touch cluster-a.kubeconfig
# create cluster-b.kubeconfig file
touch cluster-b.kubeconfig
# copy kubeconfig from the clusters accordingly
----

Define the following environment variables

[source,bash]
----
export ZTWIM_NS=zero-trust-workload-identity-manager

> export OSSM_NS=istio-system
> export OSSM_CNI=istio-cni

Reviewer: ```suggestion
export OSSM_NS=istio-system
export OSSM_CNI_NS=istio-cni
```
To keep the same format and be more explicit. This will need to be replaced across the etnire document where the var is used

export CLUSTER_A_KUBECONFIG=$(pwd)/cluster-a.kubeconfig
export CLUSTER_B_KUBECONFIG=$(pwd)/cluster-b.kubeconfig
export CLUSTER_A_BASE_DOMAIN=$(oc get ingresses.config/cluster -o jsonpath={.spec.domain} --kubeconfig "${CLUSTER_A_KUBECONFIG}")
export CLUSTER_B_BASE_DOMAIN=$(oc get ingresses.config/cluster -o jsonpath={.spec.domain} --kubeconfig "${CLUSTER_B_KUBECONFIG}")
export CLUSTER_A=cluster-a
export CLUSTER_B=cluster-b
export NETWORK_A=network-a
export NETWORK_B=network-b
export JWT_ISSUER_CLUSTER_A="https://oidc-discovery.$CLUSTER_A_BASE_DOMAIN"
export JWT_ISSUER_CLUSTER_B="https://oidc-discovery.$CLUSTER_B_BASE_DOMAIN"
export FEDERATION_ENDPOINT_CLUSTER_A="https://federation.$CLUSTER_A_BASE_DOMAIN"
export FEDERATION_ENDPOINT_CLUSTER_B="https://federation.$CLUSTER_B_BASE_DOMAIN"
export VALIDATOR_DOMAIN_CLUSTER_A="validator.$CLUSTER_A_BASE_DOMAIN"
export SPIFFE_AUDIENCE="federation-test"
----

==== [[fed-install-ztwim-operator]]Install ZTWIM Operator on both clusters

> [source,bash]

Reviewer: I think it is better explained step by step. But if we already have a section in the main document on How to install the operator, you can mentione and redirect people to that section install of adding a bash with a for for this in both cluster. Mention something like: for each cluster, you will need to install the Operator following the steps mentioned here for each one of the clusters

---
apiVersion: operators.coreos.com/v1
kind: OperatorGroup
metadata:
  name: openshift-zero-trust-workload-identity-manager
  namespace: $ZTWIM_NS
spec:
  upgradeStrategy: Default
EOF

oc apply --kubeconfig "${kubeconfig}" -f - <<EOF
---
apiVersion: operators.coreos.com/v1alpha1
kind: Subscription
metadata:
  name: openshift-zero-trust-workload-identity-manager
  namespace: $ZTWIM_NS
spec:
  channel: stable-v1
  name: openshift-zero-trust-workload-identity-manager
  source: redhat-operators
  sourceNamespace: openshift-marketplace
  installPlanApproval: Automatic
EOF

oc -n "${ZTWIM_NS}" --kubeconfig "${kubeconfig}" patch subscription \
  openshift-zero-trust-workload-identity-manager \
  --type='merge' -p '{"spec":{"config":{"env":[{"name":"CREATE_ONLY_MODE","value":"true"}]}}}'

until oc get deployment zero-trust-workload-identity-manager-controller-manager --kubeconfig "${kubeconfig}" -n "${ZTWIM_NS}" &> /dev/null; do
  sleep 3
done

oc wait --for=condition=Available deployment/zero-trust-workload-identity-manager-controller-manager --kubeconfig "${kubeconfig}" -n "${ZTWIM_NS}" --timeout=300s

done
----

==== [[fed-install-ztwim]]Create `ZeroTrustWorkloadIdentityManager` CR

> [source,bash]

Reviewer: Something similar here, for documentation is better to separate the steps and tell users to: create the CR on cluster A and the command annd another step create the CR on cluster B and the command

----
oc apply --kubeconfig "${CLUSTER_A_KUBECONFIG}" -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: operator.openshift.io/v1alpha1
kind: ZeroTrustWorkloadIdentityManager
metadata:
 name: cluster
 labels:
   app.kubernetes.io/name: zero-trust-workload-identity-manager
   app.kubernetes.io/managed-by: zero-trust-workload-identity-manager
spec:
  trustDomain: ${CLUSTER_A}
  clusterName: ${CLUSTER_A}
  bundleConfigMap: "spire-bundle"
EOF

oc apply --kubeconfig "${CLUSTER_B_KUBECONFIG}" -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: operator.openshift.io/v1alpha1
kind: ZeroTrustWorkloadIdentityManager
metadata:
 name: cluster
 labels:
   app.kubernetes.io/name: zero-trust-workload-identity-manager
   app.kubernetes.io/managed-by: zero-trust-workload-identity-manager
spec:
  trustDomain: ${CLUSTER_B}
  clusterName: ${CLUSTER_B}
  bundleConfigMap: "spire-bundle"
EOF
----

==== [[fed-install-spireserver]]Install `SpireServer` CR

> [source,bash]

Reviewer: Same here

done

# Patch spire-agent configmap to add SDS configuration
for kubeconfig in "${CLUSTER_A_KUBECONFIG}" "${CLUSTER_B_KUBECONFIG}"; do
  # Get current agent.conf
  AGENT_CONF=$(oc get configmap spire-agent --kubeconfig "${kubeconfig}" -n "${ZTWIM_NS}" -o jsonpath='{.data.agent\.conf}')

  # Check if SDS configuration already exists
  if echo "${AGENT_CONF}" | grep -q '"sds"'; then
    echo "SDS configuration already exists in spire-agent configmap, skipping patch"
    continue
  fi

  # Add SDS configuration to agent section using jq
  PATCHED_CONF=$(echo "${AGENT_CONF}" | jq '.agent.sds = {
    "default_svid_name": "default",
    "default_bundle_name": "null",
    "default_all_bundles_name": "ROOTCA"
  }')

  # Create patch payload
  oc patch configmap spire-agent --kubeconfig "${kubeconfig}" -n "${ZTWIM_NS}" --type merge -p "{\"data\":{\"agent.conf\":$(echo "${PATCHED_CONF}" | jq -Rs .)}}"

  # Restart spire-agent daemonset to pick up new config
  oc rollout restart daemonset/spire-agent --kubeconfig "${kubeconfig}" -n "${ZTWIM_NS}"
  oc rollout status daemonset/spire-agent --kubeconfig "${kubeconfig}" -n "${ZTWIM_NS}" --timeout=300s
done
----

> _Note, once the `SpireAgent` deployed we must patch the agent configuration and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_Note, once the `SpireAgent` is deployed, we must patch the agent configuration and
```

  name: cluster
spec:
  logLevel: "info"
  logFormat: "text"
  csiDriverName: "csi.spiffe.io"
  jwtIssuer: $JWT_ISSUER_CLUSTER_A
  replicaCount: 1
  managedRoute: "true"
EOF

until oc get deployment spire-spiffe-oidc-discovery-provider --kubeconfig "${CLUSTER_A_KUBECONFIG}" -n "${ZTWIM_NS}" &> /dev/null; do sleep 3; done

oc wait --for=condition=Available deployment/spire-spiffe-oidc-discovery-provider --kubeconfig "${CLUSTER_A_KUBECONFIG}" -n "${ZTWIM_NS}" --timeout=300s

cat <<EOF | oc apply --kubeconfig "${CLUSTER_B_KUBECONFIG}" -f -
apiVersion: operator.openshift.io/v1alpha1
kind: SpireOIDCDiscoveryProvider
metadata:
  name: cluster
spec:
  logLevel: "info"
  logFormat: "text"
  csiDriverName: "csi.spiffe.io"
  jwtIssuer: $JWT_ISSUER_CLUSTER_B
  replicaCount: 1
  managedRoute: "true"
EOF

until oc get deployment spire-spiffe-oidc-discovery-provider --kubeconfig "${CLUSTER_B_KUBECONFIG}" -n "${ZTWIM_NS}" &> /dev/null; do sleep 3; done

oc wait --for=condition=Available deployment/spire-spiffe-oidc-discovery-provider --kubeconfig "${CLUSTER_B_KUBECONFIG}" -n "${ZTWIM_NS}" --timeout=300s
----

==== [[fed-install-cluster-federation]]Install `ClusterFederatedTrustDomain` CR

> [source,bash]

Reviewer: Similar here, I think each configuration step should be a bullet point install a huge code block with comments

metadata:
  name: servicemeshoperator3
  namespace: openshift-operators
spec:
  channel: stable
  installPlanApproval: Automatic
  name: servicemeshoperator3
  source: redhat-operators
  sourceNamespace: openshift-marketplace
EOF

until oc get deployment servicemesh-operator3 --kubeconfig="${kubeconfig}" -n openshift-operators &> /dev/null; do sleep 3; done

oc wait --for=condition=Available deployment/servicemesh-operator3 --kubeconfig="${kubeconfig}" -n openshift-operators --timeout=300s

done
----

==== [[fed-install-ossm-cni]]Install Istio CNI

[source,bash]
----
for kubeconfig in "${CLUSTER_A_KUBECONFIG}" "${CLUSTER_B_KUBECONFIG}"; do
oc new-project "${OSSM_CNI}" --kubeconfig="${kubeconfig}"
# Create IstioCNI and wait till it successfully installed
oc apply --kubeconfig="${kubeconfig}" -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: sailoperator.io/v1
kind: IstioCNI
metadata:
  name: default
spec:
  namespace: ${OSSM_CNI}
EOF
until oc get daemonset/istio-cni-node --kubeconfig="${kubeconfig}" -n "${OSSM_CNI}" &> /dev/null; do sleep 3; done
kubectl rollout status daemonset/istio-cni-node --kubeconfig="${kubeconfig}" -n "${OSSM_CNI}" --timeout=300s
done
----

==== [[fed-install-istiod]]Install Istiod

> [source,bash]

Reviewer: Same here, separated bullet will make it easier to go over steps

                           base64 -d | \
                           sed 's/^/        /')"
else
  export ISTIO_TRUST_DOMAIN_NAME=$CLUSTER_B
  export ISTIO_TRUST_DOMAIN_NAME_ALIAS=$CLUSTER_A
  export ISTIO_MESH_ID=$CLUSTER_B
  export ISTIO_MULTI_CLUSTER_NAME=$CLUSTER_B
  export ISTIO_MULTI_CLUSTER_NETWORK=$NETWORK_B
  export EXTRA_ROOT_CA="$(oc get secret --kubeconfig="${kubeconfig}" oidc-serving-cert \
                           -n ${ZTWIM_NS} -o json | \
                           jq -r '.data."tls.crt"' | \
                           base64 -d | \
                           sed 's/^/        /')"
fi
# Create Istiod
cat <<EOF | oc apply --kubeconfig="${kubeconfig}" -f -
apiVersion: sailoperator.io/v1
kind: Istio
metadata:
  name: default
spec:
  namespace: istio-system
  updateStrategy:
    type: InPlace
  values:
    global:
      meshID: $ISTIO_MESH_ID
      multiCluster:
        clusterName: $ISTIO_MULTI_CLUSTER_NAME
      network: $ISTIO_MULTI_CLUSTER_NETWORK
    meshConfig:
      defaultConfig:
        proxyMetadata:
          WORKLOAD_IDENTITY_SOCKET_FILE: "spire-agent.sock"
      trustDomain: $ISTIO_TRUST_DOMAIN_NAME
      trustDomainAliases:

>       - $ISTIO_TRUST_DOMAIN_NAME_ALIAS

Reviewer 2: Hi @Dimss ,
using trustDomainAliases will make the spire federation work with Istio but was that the main intention of trustDomainAliases field? I believe it was designed for trust domain migration. 

Adding federated trust domains in trustDomainAliases would mean:

1. AuthorizationPolicy cannot distinguish between clusters meaning, any policy allowing one trust domain implicitly allows the other
2. TLS accepts any identity from any aliased trust domain meaning, inbound connections from aliased domains pass the SAN check

cc: @PillaiManish

Author: @rausingh-rh fixed in the new docs section

Reviewer 2: so now we are using caCertificates, right? This makes sense. Thanks @Dimss 
```
caCertificates:
      - spiffeBundleUrl: $CLUSTER_A_BUNDLE_ENDPOINT_URL
        trustDomains:
        - $CLUSTER_A
      - spiffeBundleUrl: $CLUSTER_B_BUNDLE_ENDPOINT_URL
        trustDomains:
        - $CLUSTER_B
